SPARK - Making fire

1. Introduction and Conventions

This document is an attempt at documenting the design of SPARK
post-mortem. Since SPARK has been created as relief to pressing
needs and not as a system, this has limits. Nonetheless, here you go.

1.1. History / Blurb

At the time when I (Ingo Albrecht) came to ART+COM, creating
GUI applications with Y60 was extremely hard. Being a library
kind of guy, I created an early ancestor of SPARK as part
of the "Boersenspiel / Wie entsteht ein Aktienkurs" multitouch table,
which was part of the "VW Investor Relations" project. This
archaic bunch of UI code was partly derived from an early
version of what was then called "TischMaschine".

After this project, I worked with Adobe Flex for a long while,
implementing the "VisionBuilds" flash application.

These two experiences led to a strong feeling of discontent with
the necessities of GUI programming in Y60 and a rather strong
wish to replace the baroque, overweight and cumbersome scene
interface of Y60 with something more suitable.

I therefore set out to implement a GUI library. After some
tinkering, an early prototype of SPARK was used to implement
the "Aerodynamik" multitouch table as part of the project
"Bombardier Messetische". This early prototype consisted
of the object system and the component model. Input event
dispatch was still manual work.

At that time, SPARK competed with a library called XIP, which
was derived from a then-failed attempt at creating a GUI library
called "TischMaschine". Remnants of this fact can be found in a
few places in SPARK, as XIP was refactored to use the SPARK object
system at some point.

Around this time, XIP lost its maintainers to project work.
This lead to SPARK being used by other projects more and more,
even replacing XIP in some cases. After a while, SPARK started
gaining features.

An event system was created, the widget library started to
grow beyond a single file, multitouch support was written.

Today, SPARK is still far from finished. Still, it is the
predominant GUI library for Y60 and, compared to the vacuum
it fills, quite featureful and definitely usable.

Exposure to both unintroduced internal developers and
external developers has shown that it is conceptually
mature enough to be eligible for long-term maintenance.

1.2. Coding style

Where not otherwise specified, SPARK follows ART+COM style.

Indentation is 4 spaces.
All comment styles are allowed.
Omission of block braces is not allowed.
Classic "getter/setter" syntax is currently mandatory,
but meant to be replaced by the Getter and Setter metamethods.
Statement-finishing semicolons are mandatory, including uses of "function".

1.3. Naming

Where not otherwise specified, SPARK follows ART+COM style.

Globals should not follow ART+COM style ("our") when they are
contained in a global namespace as this convention has been
perceived as ugly and unnecessary for dynamic languages.

Instance variables that are part of a metaobject closure
should not use "_my", but resort to classic "my", as they
are not considered to be "true" instance variables, but a
degenerate form that is more suited to being written in
a manner consistent with normal functions and algorithms.

Names beginning with an uppercase character may be used
only for class names and (as an exception) for metaconstructs.
For this purpose, "instance-magic" names such as "Protected",
"Public" and "Base" are considered to be metaconstructs.

Names beginning and ending with a single underscore are
used for internal purposes and should be considered as
reserved.

1.4. Warning policy

If classic Y60 spidermonkey warns about something,
that construct is by definition forbidden.

1.5. Dependency policy

SPARK shall depend only on plain Y60 plus some carefully
selected javascript classes (such as "SceneViewer") that provide
the neccessary pragmatics to make Y60 go. These dependencies
are internal and should not be called by the client.

All geometry classes are allowed, as is XML support. Y60 file
manipulation is allowed only in situations where it can't be
avoided.

Everything else should only be integrated as a non-mandatory
dependency. It is expected that explicit client action be
required before any other code is loaded.


2. Object system

As every other JavaScript framework, SPARK has its own object system.

Being derived from the one in Y60, it is heavily based on convention,
does not use prototypes, uses an instance closure to provide isolation
and uses a redirected constructor.

This description is probably only readable to those with some lisp or scheme background,
as it depends heavily on terminology from a family of object systems that is commonly used in them,
the so-called "Meta Object Protocol". While this might be cumbersome, I have no idea how to express
these facts without using advanced vocabulary and consider the excursion into that realm worthwhile.

The glossary of any decent lisp book or the "Dylan Reference Manual"
should allow you to wade through this somewhat esoteric part of SPARK.


2.1. Namespaces

SPARK originally intended to support namespaces. This has never been properly implemented.

The component model and other parts of the system depend on all classes being in
the "spark" namespace, which is statically initialized.

Namespaces are plain old JS objects. The only special interface they provide is the class
creation interface, represented by the two metamethods "AbstractClass" and "Class".


2.2. Classes

The class system in SPARK is a syntax-sugerred variant of the Y60 class system.

The following is a mixture between statements of differences (to Y60) and defining clauses:

- Instead of manually defining a redirect constructor, this task is delegated to namespace metamethods.

- These metamethods ("Class" and "AbstractClass") are to be called metaclasses.

- Metaclasses define construction behaviour. The instantiation behaviour of a specific class is defined
  exclusively by its direct class, and therefore by the metaclass defining its direct class.

- Metaclasses decorate the instances of their instances with metaclass-specific metamethods during construction.
  In the case of the "class" metaclass, this includes the "Inherit" metamethod as well as the property and
  signal definers to be described in a later chapter.

- Since we do not use prototypes, the inner constructor is attached to the real constructor instead of being
  stuffed into the prototype.

- The "Public" argument to the inner constructor has been abolished in favor of the convention
  of defining a local variable "Public" equalling "this".

- A "Protected" argument remains, although it is used so seldomly that it should best be eliminated at some point.

- A "Base" object is, again by convention, created in the constructor closure.
  This object is used to hold references to baseclass methods that have been overridden.

- Any arguments given to the real constructor are passed to the inner constructor after the "Protected" object.

- An abstract class, defined by the "AbstractClass" metamethod, errs on instantiation.


2.3. Properties

The SPARK object system offers a property mechanism that has several purposes:

- mapping properties to text form (for serialization)
- allowing automatic deserialization from XML
- offering a change listener interface for use in widget implementation
- wrapping getter and setter definitions (as a replacement for the classic getter/setter syntax)

The property system knows about the type (represented by the appropriate class object) of
every property, allowing for clean extension of type-specific aspects of its functionality.

Also, every property can have an optional setter hook function that is commonly used
to propagate property changes to other components in the system. In the case of widgets,
this hook is used to update the Y60 scene nodes implementing their graphical representation.

The property system is comprised of the following three metamethods, available to
the instances of any class that has been defined using the SPARK object system:

- Property(theName, theType, theDefault, theHandler)
   (defines a full-features SPARK property, see jsdoc)
- Getter(theName, theFunction)
   (defines a plain old getter, see jsdoc)
- Setter(theName, theFunction)
   (defines a plain old setter, see jsdoc)

There also is a fourth (internal) metamethod, which is used during component realization:

- Initialize(theNode)
   (initialize property-bearing object from an xml node, see jsdoc)


2.4. Signals

The signals subsystem offers a way to define a hook-point for callbacks.

It is meant to replace uses of handler properties, where used, allowing for
multiple handlers as well as unified tracing and debugging.

This mechanism is currently unused, but is meant to replace pragmatic
kludges like the onTextChanged hook in the current NewText class.

It has the following metainterface:

- Signal(theName)
   (defines a signal slot, see jsdoc)

The signal is represented as a property on the object defining it. The property
bears a plain old JS object with the following methods:

- signal()
   (triggers the signal, immediately calling all its handlers, see jsdoc)
- call(theHandler, theContext)
   (adds a handler with a context (for use as the handlers 'this'), see jsdoc)


2.5. Components

SPARK provides a component framework that could be considered the core of it.

A component, in this context, is an object, providing arbitrary (meaning non-GUI and GUI)
functionality, that can be manipulated according to the component protocol described here.

Components have the following functional facets:

 - they can be instantiated ("deserialized") from an XML description
 - they can participate in a hierarchy, the "component hierarchy",
   which is a DOM- or GUI-toolkit-like tree of components.
 - they bear an optional name, identifying them both to the program
   and the developer working on the program
 - they have a lifecycle (new/realized/derealized/dead), which is
   currently not implemented throughout


2.6. Loading / Component Instantiation / Realization

SPARK provides a mechanism for component instantiation, implemented by the "load" module.

This subsystem can instantiate a hierarchy of arbitrary components from an XML description
that can be provided as a file, a string or a DOM document. In the case of GUI widgets,
this description is called a "layout", describing the precise appearance of widgets.

Each component is described by a single XML element bearing the name of the component
class as its name. The attributes of this element are mapped to the object-system-level
properties of the component, allowing initialization of arbitrary component state.

Components are meant to be stateful objects. After creation, they are to be considered
"unrealized" components, meaning that they do nothing but holding their state.

To make use of a component, it must be realized. In the case of widgets, realization
is the creation phase during which Y60 scene nodes representing the widget are created.
However, this mechanism is more general than that. A sound component, for example,
would load its buffer during realization. It should also not open its output channel
until it is realized. An unrealized component should behave like a POJSO.

There is a special case in the loader handling the class name "Template". This is
used to register the templates described in the next section. A class can therefore
never be named "Template".


2.7. Templates

Atop the component framework, there is a template mechanism that allows for component
descriptions to be repeatedly instantiated. Templates are "compiled" into a pseudoclass
that can be instantiated using the standard JS construction protocol. These classes
are also registered as component classes, allowing them to be instantiated from
XML component descriptions at any point after their definition.

A template is defined by using the special component name "Template", subject
to the following signature:

<Template name="ClassName" src="class-name.spark"/>

Such a clause defines a template class named "ClassName" that will instantiate a
full, independent component hierarchy, as described in class-name.spark, whenever
the template class is instantiated from a component description or from code.

A reference to a template class is called a "template call". The call refers
to the template class, making the correct terminology "calling a template class".

Consider an imaginary template (in the file class-name.spark):

<Transform>
  <Button x="5"  width="10" height="10" color="red"/>
  <Button x="20" width="10" height="10" color="green"/>
</Transform>

Following our example, a call for the "ClassName" template might look as follows:

<ClassName/>

This call will create a transform and two buttons, as described by the template.

Template calls can be given arguments in the form of XML attributes. This is
achieved by taking all attributes from the template call and applying them
to the root element of the template itself.

Therefore, if you call our example template as follows:

<ClassName name="on-off-switches" x="100" y="100"/>

The component desription that will actually be instantiated
and realized looks as follows:

<Transform name="on-off-switches" x="100" y="100">
  <Button x="5"  width="10" height="10" color="red"/>
  <Button x="20" width="10" height="10" color="green"/>
</Transform>

This mechanism is completely general and can be used for arbitrary
properties on arbitrary components.

Arguments from the template call override attributes in the template silently.

Child nodes of the template call are currently thrown away.


3. Widgets

Widgets are components with a graphical representation.

In SPARK, they realize to Y60 scene data structures.

All widgets are SPARK component containers, allowing arbitrary non-widgets
to be place in them, even if they do not allow for graphical children.

The SPARK widget library is the least-engineered part of SPARK,
providing a lose grabbag collection of common functionality that
popped up in the process of developing the applications that, to date,
have been realized with it.

Widgets form part of the component hierarchy. Within the bounds of this
section, the part of the component tree that is comprised of widgets
shall be called "widget subtree". This term is derived from the notion
of the component tree being a hypertree (as in hypergraph) of the widget
tree.

All widgets, except for stages, must exist as children of another widget.
This invariant guarantees that any widget subtree of the component tree
forms a closed subtree of the total tree. There may be several widget trees
within a running system, each of them being rooted in a stage and having
leaves that are bodies. All widgets may have non-widget children. Stages
can be children of non-widgets iff they are self-sufficient. Currently,
Window is the only self-sufficient stage-class.


3.1. Common functionality

All widgets provide:

 - positioning and orienting
 - visibility flag
 - interaction sensibility flag


3.2. Basic Widgets

There are two base classes for widget implementation from which
all other widgets are derived:

- Transform
   A transform is the fundamental container. At some point, it
   would be subclassed to provide VBox, HBox, Window...
   Currently, it is normally used in plain.
- Body
   Bodies form the leaves of the widget subtree of the 


3.3. The Stage (Or Several Thereof)

Every widget hierarchy starts with a so-called stage.

This special class of widgets represents the (2D) canvas on
which the widget hierarchy will be rendered. It also cares
about event dispatch, input device focus and other things
that are normally application-level decisions.

There are currently two stage classes:

- Window
   A Y60 SceneViewer window, backed by SDL. This stage
   supports the mayor Y60 input devices (keyboard, mouse)
   as well as TUIO and Proximatrix multitouch devices.

- Canvas
   An offscreen-rendering stage. This can be used to render
   a world into a texture for compositing purposes. Currently
   does not support events of any kind. Can't be used as the
   root of a widget hierarchy as it is itself a widget,
   behaving similarly to an Image or ResizableRectangle.


3.4. Text

Text rendering in spark is done using the Text and NewText widgets.

Currently, the Y60 TTF renderer is used for rendering text.
This has loads of disadvantages, most notably that formatting
is not properly abstracted. Replacing this renderer with a proper
font rendering library (such as pango) is strongly advised.

For design information about the current SPARK text renderer,
see source code comments in the "text" module.


3.5. Movies

As for text rendering, SPARK provides two widgets for playing movies:
Movie and NewMovie. They both represent various stages of evolution
of video playback integration. Both are not satisfactory and a
replacement should definitely be considered.


4. Events

SPARK implements an event system that is extremely similar to DOM Level 3 Events.

The API is for this event system is derived from Adobe Flash (AS3).

An EventDispatcher class is provided. This class should be inherited into
any objects participating in event dispatch. Such objects must implement a
certain hierarchy protocol.

See the "event" module for detailed design notes.


5. Animations

There exists an animation system that can be used with SPARK. This subsystem
is a port of some Flash AS3 animation code to Y60 javascript. It has not
been designed for use with SPARK but seemed well-suited.

SPARK should automatically load it.

The animation system works by hooking a so-called AnimationManager to your
applications onFrame hook. All running animations will be advanced on every
frame.

Animations are fire-and-forget, meaning that there is no obligation to destroy
animations manually after they have been played. This is in contrast to Y60
scene animations, which require extensive manual setup and, more importantly,
manual animation destruction.

There are two fundamental kinds of animation: Composite and Simple.
Composite animations are containers for sub-animations, forming sequences
and parallels. Simple animations are leaves in the animation hierarchy,


Composite animations:

Sequence animations have a duration totalling that of its children and play
one child animation after another.

Parallel animations have a duration that is the maximum of the durations
of all child animations. All animations are played until they run out,
stopping the parallel animation once all children have been played.


Simple animations:

Property animations (the most prevalent type) animate a single property
on a POJSO. They have a start and end value, interpolating linearly between
them.

Rotation animations are used to rotate objects using degrees as
the fundamental unit. This allows creating an animation that, for
example, executes a 720° rotation over a given duration. These
interpolate linearly, but are aware of angle wraparound.

Quaternion animations perform linear quaternion interpolation.

Vector animations (???)

Delay animations are simple placeholders. They can be used in sequences
to provide pauses or to pad a parallel animation to a certain length.

Closure animations are based on callbacks provided by the user.
Every time such an animation ticks, it will call a user-provided function
with the animation progress (0..1) as its sole argument. This allows
animation of several things in concert. The values given to the callback
are guaranteed to be monotonic, allowing state-changes along the timeline
of the animation.


6. Internationalization (i18n)

